DM-48010: Add directions to playbook for Science Pipelines quick-builds (#242)
lsst-dm/prompt_processing: doc/playbook.rst

==========

The service consists of two containers.
The first is a **base container** with the Science Pipelines "stack" code and networking utilities.
The second is a **service container** made from the base that has the Prompt Processing service code.
All containers are managed by `GitHub Container Registry <https://github.com/orgs/lsst-dm/packages?repo_name=prompt_processing>`_ and are built using GitHub Actions.

To build the base container:

* If there are changes to the container, push them to a branch, then open a PR.
  This will build the container automatically.
* If there are no changes (typically because you want to use an updated Science Pipelines container), go to the repository's `Actions tab <https://github.com/lsst-dm/prompt_processing/actions/workflows/build-base.yml>`_ and select "**Run workflow**". From the dropdown menu, select:

  #. The branch whose container definition will be used

>   #. The label of the Science Pipelines container.

Reviewer: I think you need to include an entry for the science pipelines container (possibly adding it on commit "Add directions to playbook..."? AFAICT that's the step you and Erin missed over the weekend.

Author: Huh. [Sadly I was mostly out that weekend so I'll check in with @erinleighh about the specifics]. Do you mean that this set of directions needs the step where the container label is taken from the appropriate container at this link: https://github.com/orgs/lsst-dm/packages?repo_name=prompt_processing ?

Reviewer: No, the action is hardcoded to always build `prompt-base`. But the "Science Pipelines container" needs to have the name of the _input_ container being used to make the base -- `lsstsqre/centos`, the default, is the official weekly/daily build, while Quick-Stack is [`ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack`](http://ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack) (you mentioned it earlier, as the output of the build process).

==========

The service consists of two containers.
The first is a **base container** with the Science Pipelines "stack" code and networking utilities.
The second is a **service container** made from the base that has the Prompt Processing service code.
All containers are managed by `GitHub Container Registry <https://github.com/orgs/lsst-dm/packages?repo_name=prompt_processing>`_ and are built using GitHub Actions.

To build the base container:

* If there are changes to the container, push them to a branch, then open a PR.
  This will build the container automatically.
* If there are no changes (typically because you want to use an updated Science Pipelines container), go to the repository's `Actions tab <https://github.com/lsst-dm/prompt_processing/actions/workflows/build-base.yml>`_ and select "**Run workflow**". From the dropdown menu, select:

  #. The branch whose container definition will be used
  #. The label of the Science Pipelines container.

>   #. If using a quick-stack build, the Science Pipelines Container should be set to `ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack <https://ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack>`_.*

Reviewer: What is the `*` for? It shows up literally in the output.

  #. The branch whose container definition will be used
  #. The label of the Science Pipelines container.

>   #. If using a quick-stack build, the Science Pipelines Container shuold be set to `ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack <ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  #. If using a quick-stack build, the Science Pipelines Container should be set to `ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack <https://ghcr.io/lsst/quick-stack>`_.
```
Do proofread your links!

To build the service container:

* If there are changes to the service, push them to a branch, then open a PR.
  This will build the container automatically using the ``latest`` base container.
* To force a rebuild manually, go to the repository's `Actions tab <https://github.com/lsst-dm/prompt_processing/actions/workflows/build-service.yml>`_ and select "**Run workflow**".
  From the dropdown, select the branch whose code should be built.
  By default, the container is built using the ``latest`` base container, even if there is a branch build of the base.

  *  If this is the desired base container, no action is necessary.
  *  To use a base other than ``latest``, edit ``.github/workflows/build-service.yml`` on the branch and override the ``BASE_TAG_LIST`` variable.
     Be careful not to merge the temporary override to ``main``!
* New service containers built from ``main`` have the tags of their base container.

>   Containers built from a branch should be prefixed by the ticket number or, for user branches, the branch topic.

Author: I overthought this. I'll change it back!

This is the only situation in which a change to ``BASE_TAG_LIST`` should be committed to ``main``.

In case your intended Base Container is not a tagged Science Pipelines Release: Building the Science Pipelines Manually
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> It will sometimes be necessary to compile a container with the LSST Science Pipelines manually. Generally, this only occurs if the intended daily or weekly stack does not compile. In these cases, the Science Pipelines themselves must be built ahead of the base container. Here are instructions for building the Science Pipelines.

Reviewer: Confluence isn't recommended for documentation (though I don't remember ATM why). I think a readme in `gha_build` is a natural place, given that it doesn't have LSST-style docs, but you could ask on `#square-docs-support` or `#dm-science-pipelines`?

#. Check the `Science Pipelines changelog <https://lsst-dm.github.io/lsst_git_changelog/weekly/>`_ to make sure only the intended changes are on ``main``.
   

>    If ``main`` contains only changes that are intended for the Science Pipelines build, proceed and build the main branch! Otherwise, a cherry-pick or backport branch should be built.

Author: My impression from talking through this with @isullivan was that, if you ended up backporting changes, you'd need a branch containing changes from each of them as you said. I'd love confirmation that that is the case, since I've not gone through this part of the process myself.

>    If ``main`` contains only changes that are intended for the Science Pipelines build, proceed and build the main branch! Otherwise, a cherry-pick or backport branch should be built.

Reviewer 2: Yes, @kfindeisen is correct that you need a backport branch for each package with changes of interest. You do not need to make a branch when `main` is already correct (i.e. includes all of the changes you want, and does not have unrelated changes you do not want).

#. Go to the `GitHub Actions build system for the Science Pipelines. <https://github.com/lsst/gha_build/actions/workflows/build.yaml>`_

#. Select "**Run Workflow**."" In the drop-down menu, fill in the following details:
   
   #. **Use workflow from** 

>       In almost all cases, you'll want the ``main`` branch. Generally speaking, this is the branch of the Science Pipelines that you're trying to build. If there is a specific branch for a cherry-pick or backport, you'll want that branch instead.

Author: First comment: I think you're correct here; will fix in just a moment.

Second comment: my main piece of feedback for this guide is that it's not always clear what to do first (or if order matters). A lot of section-level steps are prerequisites for other section-level steps. In this case I'm going in order of top to bottom on the webpage, just to make it a little more linear. But we could make this one bullet points that match the webpage order; that should also be fine.

   #. **List of products to build**

>       Insert products to build, just like for Jenkins, but the default is what the standard containers have (except ``pipelines_check``).

Author: This text was taken directly from @isullivan's notes (I think from KT initially)? I don't know if `pipelines_check` used to be the default here, or if this is instead a statement that it has everything that Jenkins does minus `pipelines_check`. Ian, do you know?

>       Insert products to build, just like for Jenkins, but the default is what the standard containers have (except ``pipelines_check``).

Reviewer 2: Ah, that came from a hasty note to myself, that the default build action here builds `lsst_distrib lsst_sitcom` whereas the defaults on Jenkins are different. That comment doesn't belong here, especially since the defaults on Jenkins have changed since I wrote that note (they are now `lsst_distrib lsst_ci lsst_middleware lsst_sitcom`)

This is the only situation in which a change to ``BASE_TAG_LIST`` should be committed to ``main``.

> It will sometimes be necessary to compile a container with the LSST Science Pipelines manually (called a Quick-Stack build).

Reviewer: This commit largely reverses "Add directions to playbook for Science Pipelines quick-builds ". Would it be possible to merge the two so that the commit history looks more coherent?

Reviewer: I meant merge _only_ those two commits; now it's impossible to [tell the formatting changes from the content ones](https://developer.lsst.io/work/flow.html#git-commit-organization-best-practices).

Generally, this only occurs if the intended daily or weekly stack does not compile.
In these cases, the Science Pipelines themselves must be built ahead of the base container.

> Instructions for building the Science Pipelines are `here <https://github.com/lsst/gha_build/blob/main/README.md>`_.

Reviewer: Mention that, for PP, we only need to build `lsst_distrib`?

   The first step in making a release is choosing an appropriate version number to describe it. This subsection offers guidance on this choice, as well as on differentiating between major and minor releases.

   **To see which changes have occurred since the last release:**

   On GitHub.com, navigate to the main page of the repository.
   To the right of the list of files, click the latest release.
   At the top of the page, click **## commits to main since this release**.
   (If there's no such link or it doesn't mention ``main``, the release is probably based off a branch; go up to Releases and try older versions until you find one.)
   This is the list of internal changes that will be included in the next release.

   If you are planning to update the Science Pipelines tag, you should also check the `Science Pipelines changelog <https://lsst-dm.github.io/lsst_git_changelog/weekly/>`_.
   In practice, almost any Science Pipelines update is at least a minor version, because new features are added constantly.
   You may need to do a "Quick-Stack" build, or build the science pipelines manually. This would justify a patch version of Prompt Processing.

>    **The following changes will always trigger a major release:**

Reviewer: Maybe remove the "always"? The list is supposed to be exhaustive, and the current wording makes it sound like there are other cases, too.

   For the ``prompt_processing`` service:

   * Incompatibility with old fanned-out ``nextVisit`` messages (almost any change to ``Visit`` qualifies)
   * Incompatibility with an old `APDB schema`_, `ApdbSql`_, or `ApdbCassandra`_ version (see `DMTN-269`_ for the distinction)
   * Incompatibility with an old `Butler dimensions-config`_ version
   * A new major version of the `Alerts schema`_ (see `DMTN-093`_ for details)

   For the `next_visit_fan_out`_ service:

   * Incompatibility with old Summit ``nextVisit`` messages
   * Breaking changes in the fanned-out ``nextVisit`` messages (almost any change to ``NextVisitModel`` qualifies)

#. Create a Release

   On GitHub.com, navigate to the main page of the repository.
   To the right of the list of files, click **Releases**.
   At the top of the page, click **Draft a new release**.
   Type a tag using semantic versioning described in the previous section.

>    The Target should be the main branch.

Reviewer: I finally figured out what sometimes causes "Previous tag: auto" to pick the wrong version -- when there aren't any (eligible) PRs since the last tag, it goes back to the version before the most recent PR.

Add a note warning that `auto` is unreliable if there are no changes in PP itself?

   Select **Generate Release Notes**.
   This will generate a list of commit summaries and of submitters.
   Add text as follows:

   * Any specific motivation for the release (for example, including a specific feature, preparing for a specific observing run)
   * Science Pipelines version and rubin-env version
   * Supported `APDB schema`_ and `ApdbSql`_/`ApdbCassandra`_ versions (see `DMTN-269`_ for rationale).

>      You do *not* need to consider the `ApdbCassandraReplica` version.

Reviewer: Same story -- `ApdbCassandraReplica` does matter, please use the wording on `main`.

     A stack quoting a given minor version is compatible with *older* APDBs of that major version but not necessarily newer ones; for example, a release whose baseline is APDB schema 1.4.0 can access a schema 1.0.0 or 1.4.1 database, but not schema 1.5.
   * Supported `Butler dimensions-config`_ versions
   * The `Alerts schema`_ version used for output (see `DMTN-093`_ for details)

   .. _DMTN-093: https://dmtn-093.lsst.io/#alertmanagement

   .. _DMTN-269: https://dmtn-269.lsst.io/

   .. _Butler dimensions-config: https://pipelines.lsst.io/v/daily/modules/lsst.daf.butler/dimensions.html#dimension-universe-change-history

   .. _APDB schema: https://github.com/lsst/sdm_schemas/blob/main/python/lsst/sdm_schemas/schemas/apdb.yaml#L4

   .. _ApdbSql: https://github.com/lsst/dax_apdb/blob/main/python/lsst/dax/apdb/sql/apdbSql.py#L72-L76

   .. _ApdbCassandra: https://github.com/lsst/dax_apdb/blob/main/python/lsst/dax/apdb/cassandra/apdbCassandra.py#L85-L89

>    .. _Alerts schema: https://github.com/lsst/alert_packet/blob/main/python/lsst/alert/packet/schema/latest.txt

Reviewer: Please double-check these links, I think you overwrote the fixes from cbb1233be5fed1366eeb3916fe55a254cb34f8eb when rebasing.

   **The following changes will trigger a major release:**

   For the ``prompt_processing`` service:

   * Incompatibility with old fanned-out ``nextVisit`` messages (almost any change to ``Visit`` qualifies)
   * Incompatibility with an old `APDB schema`_, `ApdbSql`_, `ApdbCassandra`_, or `ApdbCassandraReplica`_ version (see `DMTN-269`_ for the distinction)
   * Incompatibility with an old `Butler dimensions-config`_ version
   * A new major version of the `Alerts schema`_ (see `DMTN-093`_ for details)

   For the `next_visit_fan_out`_ service:

   * Incompatibility with old Summit ``nextVisit`` messages
   * Breaking changes in the fanned-out ``nextVisit`` messages (almost any change to ``NextVisitModel`` qualifies)

#. Create a Release

   On GitHub.com, navigate to the main page of the repository.
   To the right of the list of files, click **Releases**.
   At the top of the page, click **Draft a new release**.
   Type a tag using semantic versioning described in the previous section.
   The Target should be the main branch.

   .. note::

      The `auto` option is unreliable if there are no changes in Prompt Processing itself.

>       In these cases, if there weren't any eligible Pull Requests since the last tag, it will default to choosing the version before the most recent Pull Request.

Reviewer: Maybe "In these cases, it may choose an older version than the latest" is enough?

Release tags are semantic version identifiers following the `pep 440 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/>`_ specification.
Please note that the tag does not include a ``v`` at the beginning.

#. Choosing the Version Number

   On GitHub.com, navigate to the main page of the repository.
   To the right of the list of files, click the latest release.
   At the top of the page, click **## commits to main since this release**.
   (If there's no such link or it doesn't mention ``main``, the release is probably based off a branch; go up to Releases and try older versions until you find one.)
   This is the list of internal changes that will be included in the next release.

   If you are planning to update the Science Pipelines tag, you should also check the `Science Pipelines changelog <https://lsst-dm.github.io/lsst_git_changelog/weekly/>`_.
   In practice, almost any Science Pipelines update is at least a minor version, because new features are added constantly.

>    In the future, there may be "patched weekly" builds, which would justify a patch version of Prompt Processing.

Author: Cool! It is done. Do you know how to link sub-headers in .rst?

>    In the future, there may be "patched weekly" builds, which would justify a patch version of Prompt Processing.

Reviewer: I think the default link (i.e., the verbatim title) should just work. [An explicit label](https://developer.lsst.io/restructuredtext/style.html#internal-links-to-labels) definitely will.

   * The `Alerts schema`_ version used for output (see `DMTN-093`_ for details)

   .. _DMTN-093: https://dmtn-093.lsst.io/#alertmanagement

   .. _DMTN-269: https://dmtn-269.lsst.io/

   .. _Butler dimensions-config: https://pipelines.lsst.io/v/daily/modules/lsst.daf.butler/dimensions.html#dimension-universe-change-history

   .. _APDB schema: https://github.com/lsst/sdm_schemas/blob/main/python/lsst/sdm_schemas/schemas/apdb.yaml#L4

   .. _ApdbSql: https://github.com/lsst/dax_apdb/blob/main/python/lsst/dax/apdb/sql/apdbSql.py#L72-L76

   .. _ApdbCassandra: https://github.com/lsst/dax_apdb/blob/main/python/lsst/dax/apdb/cassandra/apdbCassandra.py#L85-L89

   .. _Alerts schema: https://github.com/lsst/alert_packet/blob/main/python/lsst/alert/packet/schema/latest.txt

   Select **Publish Release**.

   The `ci-release.yaml <https://github.com/lsst-dm/prompt_processing/actions/workflows/ci-release.yaml>`_ GitHub Actions workflow uploads the new release to GitHub packages.

#. Tag the release

   At the HEAD of the ``main`` branch, create and push a tag with the semantic version:

   .. code-block:: sh

      git tag -s X.Y.Z -m "X.Y.Z"

>       git push --tags

Author: That's fair. I think "how to tag something on GitHub" is google-able enough. Maybe we find a nice how-to guide from GitHub and link it?

>       git push --tags

Author: Found what I think we need. Is this good? https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/managing-commit-signature-verification/signing-tags

>       git push --tags

Author: Maybe this one? I'll link a doc page when we can find an appropriate how-to. https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging

>       git push --tags

Reviewer: No, no: my point is that the GitHub release process (step 2) creates a tag once you commit to that version. Manually making the tag is unnecessary at best.

   In practice, almost any Science Pipelines update is at least a minor version, because new features are added constantly.
   In the future, there may be "patched weekly" builds, which would justify a patch version of Prompt Processing.

   **Guidance on designating major releases:**

> 

Author: I think it would make sense to include this information on a different page and link it. The thought with the bolded headlines was really just to give the reader a signal that this section is not relevant unless one of the following bullet point conditions is met. For now we could make a header with something like "The following cases will always trigger a major release:" instead of "Guidance on". I was thinking more like official rules for something but I definitely wouldn't want it to sound optional. For now I'll change the header and keep it as is, but we can move the entire subsection out in future if it makes more sense to do so.

> 

Reviewer: The `ApdbCassandra` link has bitrotted again. 😂 Should now be `#L87-L91`.
